README.md, before:

# Conduit

**The Universal Runtime for LLM Applications.**

Conduit is a Python framework for orchestrating Large Language Model interactions. It rejects the "Chain" metaphor in favor of a **Finite State Machine (FSM)** architecture, treating conversation history as state and prediction as a cyclic process.

It is built on three core principles:

1.  **Strict Typing:** Everything is a Pydantic model. No loose dictionaries.
2.  **No Magic:** Explicit dependency injection. You control the state.
3.  **Universal Loop:** A single runtime engine handles linear chat, RAG, and complex agentic loops using the same logic.

-----

## 📐 The Architecture

Legacy frameworks model LLM apps as "Chains" (DAGs). Conduit models them as a **State Machine**.

The core insight of Conduit is that all LLM interactions—whether a simple Q\&A or a multi-step autonomous agent—follow the same logic: **Predict the next message based on the current state.**


### The Components

1.  **The State (`Conversation`):** A passive, serializable container holding the message history.
2.  **The Engine (`Conduit`):** An active processor that inspects the *tail* of the conversation to determine the next state transition.
3.  **The Adapters (`Clients`):** An Anti-Corruption Layer (ACL) that normalizes disparate provider APIs (OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama) into internal domain objects.
4.  **The Actors (`Capabilities`):** Executable units (Tools, Skills) that perform actions when the FSM enters the `EXECUTE` state.

-----

## 🗺️ Project Structure

Conduit is organized into clear domain boundaries to prevent circular dependencies and "God Objects."

```text
src/conduit/
├── core/                  # THE KERNEL
│   ├── engine.py          # The Universal Loop (FSM) logic
│   ├── prompt.py          # Jinja2 template management
│   └── parser.py          # Structured output parsing
│
├── domain/                # THE DATA (Pure Pydantic DTOs)
│   ├── conversation.py    # The State Container
│   ├── messages.py        # Discriminated Unions (User, Assistant, Tool)
│   └── request.py         # Internal Transport DTO
│
├── clients/               # THE I/O LAYER (Adapters & ACL)
│   ├── base.py            # Abstract Client Interface
│   ├── common.py          # Payload Type Definitions
│   ├── openai/            # Provider implementations...
│   ├── anthropic/
│   └── ...
│
├── capabilities/          # THE ACTORS
│   ├── executor.py        # Tool execution logic
│   ├── tools/             # Atomic functions (filesystem, search)
│   └── skills/            # Complex behaviors (personas, memories)
│
├── storage/               # PERSISTENCE
│   ├── repository.py      # Conversation/Message persistence
│   └── odometer/          # Token counting & Telemetry
│
└── apps/                  # CONSUMERS
    ├── cli/               # Command Line Interface
    └── chat/              # TUI Application
```

-----

## 🧠 Core Concepts

### 1\. The Message Union (`domain/messages.py`)

Conduit abandons inheritance for composition. Messages are a **Discriminated Union** of strict types.

  * **`UserMessage`**: Supports multimodal content blocks (Text + Image + Audio).
  * **`AssistantMessage`**: Atomic representation of a turn. Contains **Content** (final answer), **Reasoning** (hidden chain-of-thought), and **ToolCalls** (intent to act).
  * **`ToolMessage`**: The result of an execution, strictly linked to a call ID.

### 2\. The Universal Loop (`core/engine.py`)

There are no separate classes for "Agent" vs "Chat." There is only `Conduit.run()`.

The engine implements a standard Act-Observe-Think loop:

1.  **GENERATE:** If the tail is `UserMessage` or `ToolMessage` $\rightarrow$ Call LLM.
2.  **EXECUTE:** If the tail is `AssistantMessage` with `tool_calls` $\rightarrow$ Execute Tools.
3.  **TERMINATE:** If the tail is `AssistantMessage` with text only $\rightarrow$ Return to User.

### 3\. The Anti-Corruption Layer (`clients/`)

Conduit refuses to let provider idiosyncrasies leak into your business logic.

  * **Internal Domain:** We use `Conduit.Request` (generic).
  * **Provider Domain:** We define strict `Payload` models (e.g., `AnthropicPayload`, `OpenAIPayload`) that mirror the exact API spec of the vendor.
  * **The Adapter:** The `Client` class is responsible for converting `Request` $\rightarrow$ `Payload`.

-----

## 💻 Usage Examples

### 1\. The Direct Flow (Simple Chat)

For linear, synchronous interaction.

```python
from conduit.core.engine import Conduit
from conduit.domain.conversation import Conversation
from conduit.clients.openai.client import OpenAIClient

# 1. Initialize State
conv = Conversation()
conv.add_user_message("Why is the sky blue?")

# 2. Initialize Engine
client = OpenAIClient()
conduit = Conduit(client=client)

# 3. Run the Loop (Runs until TERMINATE state)
result = conduit.run(conv)
print(result.last_message.content)
```

### 2\. The Agentic Flow (Tools & Loops)

By simply adding tools, the Engine automatically switches to a cyclic FSM.

```python
from conduit.capabilities.tools import WeatherTool, StockTool
from conduit.clients.anthropic.client import AnthropicClient

# 1. Initialize State
conv = Conversation()
conv.add_user_message("What is the stock price of Apple compared to the temperature in NY?")

# 2. Initialize Engine with Capabilities
client = AnthropicClient()
tools = [WeatherTool(), StockTool()]
conduit = Conduit(client=client, tools=tools)

# 3. Run the Loop
# The Engine will:
#   1. GENERATE (Thought: I need stock price and weather)
#   2. EXECUTE (Runs both tools in parallel)
#   3. GENERATE (Synthesizes answer based on ToolMessages)
#   4. TERMINATE
final_conv = conduit.run(conv)
```

-----

## 🔮 Future Roadmap

  * **Remote Execution:** Because `Conversation` is pure data, the Engine can serialize the state, send it to a `Headwater` server, execute the heavy compute there, and return the mutated state.
  * **Branching:** Moving from a List-based history to a Tree-based history to support "regenerate" and "alternative timeline" features without data duplication.
  * **Telemetry:** The `Odometer` system will track token usage across the FSM lifecycle, attributing costs to specific states (Reasoning vs. Generation vs. Tooling).

Commit message:

WIP: model implementation (and middleware)

README.md, after:

ok, my design has evolved a bit since that design doc.

Here are my primitives:
==Protocol Layer==
- Message: classes for defining a standardized version of UserMessage, SystemMessage, ToolMessage, AssistantMessage. My previous implementation just had a "Role" and "Content" field; these are designed to be multichannel. So there could be both text and image, for example. This is designed to be easily cacheable and serializable across HTTP.
- Request: this combines a GenerationParameters (standardized parameters and a dict field that can take custom parameters) with a list[Message], which is the conversation history thus far. The last Message will, by design, be either a UserMessage or a ToolMethod (returning the results of a ToolCall). This is designed to be easily cacheable and serializable across HTTP. If you want the latest state of the Conversation, it's the list[Message].
- Response: this is a successful result of a Client call to an LLM. It combines the original Request, a Message object (the new output), and a ResponseMetadata class (which has duration, tokens used, etc.). This is designed to be easily cacheable and serializable across HTTP. If you want the latest state of the Conversation, it's the list[Message] from the Request object with the new Message from the Response appended to the end.
- Client: a series of provider-specific class that take a standardized Request object and return ConduitResult. Examples: OpenAIClientSync, OpenAIClientAsync, etc. through Anthropic, Ollama, Google, and Perplexity. ConduitResult is a Union of: Response, ConduitError (detailed error class for transmitting across HTTP), and streamables (SyncStream, AsyncStream) which are defined by a Protocol. Those are for message parsing, for example for tools calls. Due to the design of Request / Response, the ultimate purpose of a Client is to progress a Conversation from a UserMessage or a ToolMessage to an AssistantMessage. In addition to those cloud providers, I have a RemoteClient which sends a Request to my ML server, which returns a Response. This allows me to make use of my RTX 5090 and advanced hardware for local generation.
==Instrumentation Layer==
- Model: A convenience wrapper for Client, which is initialized by a model name and optional parameters. There is a Sync and Async version of this. In a way, a Model is a collection of factory methods for creating Requests; it's also the easiest way to just dash off an LLM request in a script. It's the main interface for applications to make LLM calls without having to hand-roll the Request object.
- Prompt: a convenience wrapper for Prompts, which defaults to jinja2 and handles rendering / input schema detection and validation.
- Parser: a simple object that wraps a Pydantic class for use with structure output (with python Instructor library).
==Orchestration Layer==
- Conversation: this wraps a list[Message] with convenience functions and serialization and metadata, and is the data object at the center of conversation state management.
- Channel: this was formerly called a "Conduit", and is a way to connect a Model, a Prompt, and a Parser to generate Responses. It also manages conversation state. There's a SyncConduit, a BatchConduit, an AsyncConduit, and a ToolConduit (implementation TBD).
- Engine: this is the FSM, and its job is to take a Conversation and progress it to the next step. If the last message is a UserMessage, the next state is "GENERATE" (to get an ASsistant message). If it's an ASsistant message, it's "TERMINATE". There's also EXECUTE for tools calls. Channel objects use this under the hood. Just like a Model provides a UI layer on top of Client, Channel does that for Engine. A Channel object's job is to generate a conversation of a desired state and send it to the Engine. That's it. (obviously batching adds the element of an async engine)

Assess this design





# Conduit

**The Universal Runtime for LLM Applications.**

Conduit is a Python framework for orchestrating Large Language Model interactions. It rejects the "Chain" metaphor in favor of a **Finite State Machine (FSM)** architecture, treating conversation history as state and prediction as a cyclic process.

It is built on three core principles:

1.  **Strict Typing:** Everything is a Pydantic model. No loose dictionaries.
2.  **No Magic:** Explicit dependency injection. You control the state.
3.  **Universal Loop:** A single runtime engine handles linear chat, RAG, and complex agentic loops using the same logic.

-----

## 📐 The Architecture

Legacy frameworks model LLM apps as "Chains" (DAGs). Conduit models them as a **State Machine**.

The core insight of Conduit is that all LLM interactions—whether a simple Q\&A or a multi-step autonomous agent—follow the same logic: **Predict the next message based on the current state.**


### The Components

1.  **The State (`Conversation`):** A passive, serializable container holding the message history.
2.  **The Engine (`Conduit`):** An active processor that inspects the *tail* of the conversation to determine the next state transition.
3.  **The Adapters (`Clients`):** An Anti-Corruption Layer (ACL) that normalizes disparate provider APIs (OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama) into internal domain objects.
4.  **The Actors (`Capabilities`):** Executable units (Tools, Skills) that perform actions when the FSM enters the `EXECUTE` state.

-----

## 🗺️ Project Structure

Conduit is organized into clear domain boundaries to prevent circular dependencies and "God Objects."

```text
src/conduit/
├── core/                  # THE KERNEL
│   ├── engine.py          # The Universal Loop (FSM) logic
│   ├── prompt.py          # Jinja2 template management
│   └── parser.py          # Structured output parsing
│
├── domain/                # THE DATA (Pure Pydantic DTOs)
│   ├── conversation.py    # The State Container
│   ├── messages.py        # Discriminated Unions (User, Assistant, Tool)
│   └── request.py         # Internal Transport DTO
│
├── clients/               # THE I/O LAYER (Adapters & ACL)
│   ├── base.py            # Abstract Client Interface
│   ├── common.py          # Payload Type Definitions
│   ├── openai/            # Provider implementations...
│   ├── anthropic/
│   └── ...
│
├── capabilities/          # THE ACTORS
│   ├── executor.py        # Tool execution logic
│   ├── tools/             # Atomic functions (filesystem, search)
│   └── skills/            # Complex behaviors (personas, memories)
│
├── storage/               # PERSISTENCE
│   ├── repository.py      # Conversation/Message persistence
│   └── odometer/          # Token counting & Telemetry
│
└── apps/                  # CONSUMERS
    ├── cli/               # Command Line Interface
    └── chat/              # TUI Application
```

-----

## 🧠 Core Concepts

### 1\. The Message Union (`domain/messages.py`)

Conduit abandons inheritance for composition. Messages are a **Discriminated Union** of strict types.

  * **`UserMessage`**: Supports multimodal content blocks (Text + Image + Audio).
  * **`AssistantMessage`**: Atomic representation of a turn. Contains **Content** (final answer), **Reasoning** (hidden chain-of-thought), and **ToolCalls** (intent to act).
  * **`ToolMessage`**: The result of an execution, strictly linked to a call ID.

### 2\. The Universal Loop (`core/engine.py`)

There are no separate classes for "Agent" vs "Chat." There is only `Conduit.run()`.

The engine implements a standard Act-Observe-Think loop:

1.  **GENERATE:** If the tail is `UserMessage` or `ToolMessage` $\rightarrow$ Call LLM.
2.  **EXECUTE:** If the tail is `AssistantMessage` with `tool_calls` $\rightarrow$ Execute Tools.
3.  **TERMINATE:** If the tail is `AssistantMessage` with text only $\rightarrow$ Return to User.

### 3\. The Anti-Corruption Layer (`clients/`)

Conduit refuses to let provider idiosyncrasies leak into your business logic.

  * **Internal Domain:** We use `Conduit.Request` (generic).
  * **Provider Domain:** We define strict `Payload` models (e.g., `AnthropicPayload`, `OpenAIPayload`) that mirror the exact API spec of the vendor.
  * **The Adapter:** The `Client` class is responsible for converting `Request` $\rightarrow$ `Payload`.

-----

## 💻 Usage Examples

### 1\. The Direct Flow (Simple Chat)

For linear, synchronous interaction.

```python
from conduit.core.engine import Conduit
from conduit.domain.conversation import Conversation
from conduit.clients.openai.client import OpenAIClient

# 1. Initialize State
conv = Conversation()
conv.add_user_message("Why is the sky blue?")

# 2. Initialize Engine
client = OpenAIClient()
conduit = Conduit(client=client)

# 3. Run the Loop (Runs until TERMINATE state)
result = conduit.run(conv)
print(result.last_message.content)
```

### 2\. The Agentic Flow (Tools & Loops)

By simply adding tools, the Engine automatically switches to a cyclic FSM.

```python
from conduit.capabilities.tools import WeatherTool, StockTool
from conduit.clients.anthropic.client import AnthropicClient

# 1. Initialize State
conv = Conversation()
conv.add_user_message("What is the stock price of Apple compared to the temperature in NY?")

# 2. Initialize Engine with Capabilities
client = AnthropicClient()
tools = [WeatherTool(), StockTool()]
conduit = Conduit(client=client, tools=tools)

# 3. Run the Loop
# The Engine will:
#   1. GENERATE (Thought: I need stock price and weather)
#   2. EXECUTE (Runs both tools in parallel)
#   3. GENERATE (Synthesizes answer based on ToolMessages)
#   4. TERMINATE
final_conv = conduit.run(conv)
```

-----

## 🔮 Future Roadmap

  * **Remote Execution:** Because `Conversation` is pure data, the Engine can serialize the state, send it to a `Headwater` server, execute the heavy compute there, and return the mutated state.
  * **Branching:** Moving from a List-based history to a Tree-based history to support "regenerate" and "alternative timeline" features without data duplication.
  * **Telemetry:** The `Odometer` system will track token usage across the FSM lifecycle, attributing costs to specific states (Reasoning vs. Generation vs. Tooling).
